Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
drug interactions and adverse reactions. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss drug interactions and adverse reactions.
Begin by defining a drug interaction and classifying the types.
A drug interaction is a modification of the effect of one drug by the prior or
concurrent administration of another, or by food,
so that the outcome differs from that expected of the drugs given alone.
The result may be increased effect, reduced effect,
or a new effect such as toxicity. Interactions are classified into three broad
types.
Pharmaceutical interactions occur outside the body,
before administration — physical or chemical incompatibilities in the syringe or
giving set.
Pharmacokinetic interactions occur when one drug alters the absorption,
distribution, metabolism or excretion of another,
changing the concentration that reaches the site of action.
Pharmacodynamic interactions occur at the site of action,
when drugs act on the same or related systems to produce additive,
synergistic or antagonistic effects without necessarily changing each other's
concentration. This framework lets me reason out any interaction I meet.
Give me examples of pharmaceutical interactions relevant to anaesthesia.
These are physicochemical incompatibilities that occur when drugs are mixed or
share a line.
The classic example is the precipitation that occurs when alkaline thiopental meets
an acidic drug or suxamethonium in the same cannula, which can block the line,
so it must be flushed thoroughly between drugs.
Mixing incompatible drugs in an infusion can cause precipitation or inactivation —
the inactivation of certain drugs when co-infused,
or the instability of some agents in particular diluents.
Adsorption of a drug such as insulin or glyceryl trinitrate onto plastic giving
sets reduces the delivered dose. These are avoided by knowing the compatibilities,
flushing lines, using separate access where needed,
and not mixing drugs unless compatibility is established.
Describe pharmacokinetic interactions affecting absorption.
One drug can alter the absorption of another.
Changes in gastric pH affect the ionisation and therefore the absorption of
pH-dependent drugs.
Drugs that alter gastric emptying or gut motility change the rate at which others
reach the absorptive surface of the small intestine — opioids and anticholinergics
slow emptying and delay absorption, metoclopramide hastens it.
Chelation and binding interactions occur when one agent binds another in the gut,
as antacids, calcium or iron bind certain antibiotics, reducing their absorption.
And drugs affecting splanchnic blood flow or the gut flora can alter absorption.
These matter mostly for oral therapy,
but the principle of altered absorption is general.
Explain interactions involving protein-binding displacement.
A drug that is highly protein-bound can be displaced from its binding sites by
another drug competing for the same sites, transiently increasing the free,
active fraction of the displaced drug. This is often cited for warfarin and
phenytoin, which are highly bound.
In practice the clinical importance of pure displacement is usually less than once
thought, because the increased free drug is also more available for elimination,
so the free concentration tends to return towards its original value;
but the interaction can be significant when displacement is combined with
inhibition of the displaced drug's metabolism,
or for drugs with a narrow therapeutic index.
So I would treat displacement as a real but often transient effect,
most dangerous when it coincides with another mechanism.
Metabolic interactions you have largely covered under metabolism.
Summarise them here and add renal-excretion interactions.
Metabolic interactions arise chiefly through enzyme induction and inhibition.
Induction — by rifampicin, the anticonvulsants,
chronic alcohol and barbiturates — accelerates metabolism and reduces effect over
days to weeks, with rebound on withdrawal.
Inhibition — by macrolides, azole antifungals and others — reduces metabolism and
raises concentrations within hours, dangerous for narrow-index drugs.
At the kidney, drugs interact by competing for active tubular secretion —
probenecid prolonging penicillin, for example — and by altering urinary pH to
change the ionised fraction and so the reabsorption of weak acids and bases.
Drugs that reduce renal blood flow or glomerular filtration,
such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs,
reduce the excretion of renally cleared drugs such as lithium,
raising their concentration. So each step of handling offers an opportunity for
interaction.
Now pharmacodynamic interactions. Distinguish additive,
synergistic and antagonistic effects.
Pharmacodynamic interactions occur when drugs act on the same or related systems.
An additive effect is one in which the combined effect equals the sum of the
individual effects — two drugs of the same class given together.
A synergistic, or supra-additive, effect is greater than the sum,
the combination producing more than expected,
as when a hypnotic and an opioid together depress respiration far more than either
alone, or when different classes combine to reduce anaesthetic requirements.
An antagonistic effect is one in which one drug opposes another,
reducing its effect.
Recognising which applies allows me to exploit beneficial combinations and to
anticipate dangerous ones, particularly the synergistic depression of respiration
and consciousness by co-administered central depressants.
Give examples of beneficial pharmacodynamic interactions exploited in anaesthesia.
Much of balanced anaesthesia depends on deliberate synergy.
Combining a hypnotic, an opioid and a muscle relaxant allows each to be given in
lower dose, with fewer side-effects,
than if one agent were used alone to achieve everything;
opioids markedly reduce the minimum alveolar concentration of volatile agents.
Multimodal analgesia combines drugs acting by different mechanisms — paracetamol,
a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory, an opioid and perhaps ketamine or a local
anaesthetic — for additive or synergistic analgesia with reduced opioid requirement
and side-effects.
Co-induction, such as a small dose of midazolam with propofol,
exploits synergy to reduce the induction dose.
These are interactions used to advantage, the foundation of rational combination.
And examples of antagonism used therapeutically?
Antagonism is exploited whenever we reverse a drug's effect.
Naloxone is a competitive antagonist at the opioid receptor,
reversing opioid effects. Flumazenil competitively antagonises the benzodiazepines
at their receptor.
Neostigmine antagonises non-depolarising neuromuscular blockade indirectly,
by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase and raising acetylcholine to compete with the
blocker, while sugammadex reverses aminosteroid blockers by direct chemical
encapsulation.
Atropine antagonises the muscarinic effects of neostigmine and of excess vagal
activity. Specific antidotes such as these illustrate competitive,
physiological and chemical antagonism turned to clinical use,
and the ability to terminate a drug's action on demand.
Which dangerous drug interactions must the anaesthetist particularly remember?
Several are critical. The combination of pethidine, or other serotonergic drugs,
with a monoamine oxidase inhibitor can precipitate a life-threatening serotonin
syndrome or a hyperpyrexic crisis.
The serotonin syndrome can also arise from combinations of other serotonergic
agents. Aminoglycoside antibiotics and magnesium potentiate non-depolarising
neuromuscular blockade and can prolong paralysis.
Suxamethonium given to a patient with hyperkalaemia or a susceptible condition can
cause dangerous potassium release. The synergistic respiratory and cardiovascular
depression of combined opioids, benzodiazepines and other depressants is a frequent
cause of harm.
And drugs prolonging the QT interval combine to risk arrhythmia.
Holding these in mind allows them to be anticipated and avoided.
Turn now to adverse drug reactions. Define an adverse drug reaction and outline how
they are classified.
An adverse drug reaction is a response to a drug that is noxious and unintended and
occurs at doses used for prophylaxis,
diagnosis or treatment — distinguishing it from an overdose, and,
in the strict definition, from a medication error.
The traditional classification divides reactions into two main types.
Type A, or augmented, reactions are exaggerations of the drug's known
pharmacological effects — dose-related, predictable,
common and usually not life-threatening, accounting for the majority.
Type B, or bizarre, reactions are qualitatively abnormal,
not predictable from the drug's ordinary pharmacology,
not dose-related in the usual sense, uncommon but often serious,
and including the immune and idiosyncratic reactions.
Further categories — chronic, delayed, end-of-use and failure — extend the scheme,
and a more modern framework classifies reactions by dose, time and susceptibility.
Give examples of Type A reactions.
Type A reactions are the predictable extensions of a drug's pharmacology.
Respiratory depression from an opioid, hypotension from propofol,
bradycardia from a beta-blocker, bleeding from an anticoagulant,
hypoglycaemia from insulin, and nausea from many drugs are all Type A.
They follow from the known action of the drug,
are related to dose and to the patient's sensitivity,
and are managed by dose reduction, titration, or treating the exaggerated effect.
Because they are predictable, they are largely preventable by appropriate dosing
and monitoring, and they make up the great majority of adverse reactions
encountered.
And Type B reactions — explain the immune basis where there is one.
Type B reactions are qualitatively abnormal and unpredictable,
and they include both immune-mediated hypersensitivity and non-immune idiosyncrasy.
The immune reactions are the drug allergies,
classified by the Gell and Coombs scheme into four types: type one,
immediate hypersensitivity mediated by immunoglobulin E, the basis of anaphylaxis;
type two, antibody-mediated cytotoxicity,
as in some drug-induced haemolysis or thrombocytopenia; type three,
immune-complex mediated, as in serum sickness; and type four, delayed,
T-cell mediated, as in contact dermatitis and some drug rashes.
Non-immune idiosyncratic reactions arise from genetic or other individual
peculiarities, such as malignant hyperthermia or the haemolysis of
glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
So Type B encompasses both true allergy and idiosyncrasy.
Define allergy, idiosyncrasy and intolerance precisely.
Allergy, strictly, is an immune-mediated hypersensitivity reaction,
requiring prior sensitisation and reproducible on re-exposure,
ranging from a rash to anaphylaxis.
Idiosyncrasy is a qualitatively abnormal,
often genetically determined response peculiar to the individual,
not immune-mediated and not predictable from the drug's ordinary action — malignant
hyperthermia is idiosyncratic.
Intolerance is a lowered threshold to the normal pharmacological action of a drug,
so that the patient experiences the expected effect at an unusually low dose.
These distinctions matter because patients and records often use the word allergy
loosely for any unwanted effect, and a careful history is needed to distinguish a
true allergy, which must be avoided, from a predictable side-effect or intolerance,
which may not contraindicate the drug.
Describe anaphylaxis: its mechanism and the distinction from an anaphylactoid
reaction.
Anaphylaxis is a severe, life-threatening, generalised hypersensitivity reaction.
In the classical immune form it is mediated by immunoglobulin E:
prior exposure sensitises the patient,
and on re-exposure the antigen cross-links immunoglobulin E on mast cells and
basophils, triggering massive release of histamine and other mediators,
producing vasodilatation, increased capillary permeability,
bronchospasm and cardiovascular collapse.
A clinically identical reaction can occur without immunoglobulin E,
through direct mast-cell activation or complement,
formerly called an anaphylactoid reaction.
Because the presentation and the immediate treatment are the same,
current terminology tends to call both simply anaphylaxis,
distinguishing the mechanism only on later investigation.
The essential point is that the management does not wait upon the mechanism.
What are the common triggers of perioperative anaphylaxis,
and what have recent national audits shown?
Perioperative anaphylaxis can be triggered by any drug or substance,
but the leading causes are the neuromuscular blocking drugs, antibiotics,
and the antiseptic chlorhexidine, with other causes including the opioids,
colloids, blue dyes and latex.
Recent large national audit work, such as the United Kingdom's sixth National Audit
Project on perioperative anaphylaxis, has refined this picture:
it identified antibiotics, particularly co-amoxiclav and the penicillins,
as a leading trigger alongside the neuromuscular blockers,
highlighted chlorhexidine as an under-recognised and often missed cause,
and emphasised teicoplanin reactions and the importance of accurate documentation
and referral.
Such audits guide which agents to suspect,
the importance of asking about antiseptic exposure,
and the systems needed for safe investigation and follow-up.
Outline the immediate management of perioperative anaphylaxis.
Management follows established guidelines. I would call for help,
declare the emergency, and remove the likely trigger.
The cornerstone is adrenaline, given intramuscularly or,
in the anaesthetised monitored patient,
in titrated intravenous boluses with an infusion if needed,
because it counters the vasodilatation, bronchospasm and mediator release.
I would secure and protect the airway and give one hundred per cent oxygen,
and treat bronchospasm. I would give a rapid intravenous fluid bolus to counter the
profound vasodilatation and capillary leak, often in large volumes.
I would position the patient to aid venous return.
Refractory cases may need further vasopressors and other measures.
After stabilisation I would take timed blood samples for mast-cell tryptase,
document the event fully, and refer the patient for specialist allergy
investigation.
How is anaphylaxis investigated afterwards?
Investigation has an acute and a later phase.
Acutely, serial mast-cell tryptase samples are taken — ideally one as soon as
feasible after resuscitation, one an hour or two later,
and a baseline sample after recovery — because a transient rise in tryptase
supports mast-cell degranulation and helps confirm that anaphylaxis occurred.
The patient is then referred to a specialist allergy or immunology clinic, where,
after an interval, skin-prick and intradermal testing to the suspected agents and
to alternatives, sometimes with specific immunoglobulin E assays and, rarely,
cautious challenge testing, identifies the culprit and safe alternatives.
The patient is given clear written documentation and warning of the agent to avoid.
Thorough investigation is essential, because a future exposure could be fatal.
What other adverse reactions of particular anaesthetic importance should be
recognised?
Several idiosyncratic and pharmacological reactions are critical.
Malignant hyperthermia, the inherited hypermetabolic response to volatile agents
and suxamethonium, treated with dantrolene and trigger avoidance.
Suxamethonium apnoea from plasma-cholinesterase deficiency.
Suxamethonium-induced hyperkalaemia in susceptible patients.
The serotonin syndrome from serotonergic combinations.
Local-anaesthetic systemic toxicity, treated with lipid emulsion.
Opioid-induced respiratory depression. Propofol infusion syndrome.
Drug-induced QT prolongation and arrhythmia.
Each is either a predictable Type A effect taken to excess or a recognised
idiosyncratic Type B reaction, and recognising them early,
with a clear management plan, is part of safe anaesthetic practice.
What is pharmacovigilance, and what is the anaesthetist's role?
Pharmacovigilance is the science and activity of detecting, assessing,
understanding and preventing adverse effects of medicines,
particularly once they are in widespread use,
because pre-marketing trials are too small and too brief to detect rare or delayed
reactions.
It relies heavily on spontaneous reporting by clinicians of suspected adverse
reactions to the national regulator — in the United Kingdom through the Yellow Card
scheme, with equivalent schemes elsewhere.
The anaesthetist's role is to recognise and report suspected reactions,
especially serious, unexpected or new ones and those to recently introduced drugs,
and to document them in the patient's record and warn the patient.
This collective reporting is how genuinely rare reactions are identified and how
drug safety is continually refined.
Pull it together: how does this framework guide your practice?
It lets me anticipate and prevent rather than merely react.
By classifying interactions as pharmaceutical, pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic,
I flush lines and avoid incompatible mixtures, foresee the effects of induction,
inhibition and altered excretion, and exploit beneficial synergy while guarding
against dangerous combined depression.
By classifying adverse reactions as augmented Type A or bizarre Type B,
I dose and monitor to prevent the predictable,
and remain alert for the idiosyncratic and the allergic.
I take a careful drug and allergy history,
distinguishing true allergy from intolerance and side-effect.
I am prepared to recognise and treat anaphylaxis and the specific anaesthetic
reactions promptly, to investigate them properly, and to report them.
The framework turns a mass of individual facts into a systematic approach to drug
safety.
Expand on absorption interactions with specific examples.
Several mechanisms operate.
Binding or chelation in the gut lumen: antacids, calcium,
iron and milk bind tetracyclines and certain quinolones,
and the bile-acid sequestrant cholestyramine and the mucosal agent sucralfate bind
a range of drugs, reducing their absorption — these are managed by separating the
doses in time.
Changes in gastric pH from proton-pump inhibitors alter the absorption of
pH-dependent drugs and of some antifungals and antiretrovirals.
Changes in gut motility alter the rate of absorption:
opioids and anticholinergics delay gastric emptying,
slowing the absorption of co-administered drugs, while prokinetics hasten it.
Antibiotics that disturb the gut flora can reduce the enterohepatic recycling of
drugs such as the oral contraceptive. So absorption interactions are diverse,
and mostly relevant to oral therapy.
Are there distribution interactions beyond plasma-protein displacement?
Yes.
Drugs can be displaced from tissue as well as plasma binding sites:
quinidine and amiodarone displace digoxin from tissue binding and also reduce its
clearance, raising digoxin concentrations and risking toxicity — a clinically
important interaction combining displacement with reduced excretion.
Drugs that alter regional blood flow change the distribution of others.
And drugs competing for active transport into tissues,
or for the transporters such as P-glycoprotein at the blood-brain barrier,
alter how much reaches a site of action.
So distribution offers genuine interaction opportunities,
though as with plasma displacement the effect is often most significant when
combined with an effect on elimination.
Give the important renal-excretion interactions.
Drugs interact at the kidney by several routes.
Competition for active tubular secretion:
probenecid blocks the secretion of penicillin, prolonging it,
and similar competition affects methotrexate,
whose excretion is reduced by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and
penicillins, raising its toxicity.
Reduced renal blood flow and glomerular filtration:
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs reduce the excretion of lithium,
raising its concentration to toxic levels, and impair the action of diuretics.
Changes in urinary pH alter the reabsorption of weak acids and bases.
And diuretic-induced hypokalaemia potentiates digoxin toxicity.
These renal interactions are particularly dangerous for drugs of narrow therapeutic
index such as lithium, digoxin and methotrexate.
How might one quantify synergy, and what is an isobologram?
Synergy can be examined formally with an isobologram,
a graph plotting the doses of two drugs that together produce a given effect.
If the drugs are merely additive, the combinations fall on a straight line
connecting the doses of each drug needed alone;
if the combinations fall below that line,
less of each is needed than expected and the interaction is synergistic; if above,
it is antagonistic.
This is the formal basis for statements that, for instance,
a hypnotic and an opioid act synergistically to produce hypnosis or to depress
respiration.
The concept underlies the rational design of drug combinations in balanced
anaesthesia and multimodal analgesia,
where synergy allows lower doses of each agent.
Distinguish the types of antagonism, with examples.
Antagonism takes several forms. Pharmacological antagonism is action at the same
receptor: a competitive antagonist such as naloxone or flumazenil competes
reversibly with the agonist, surmountable by raising the agonist;
an irreversible antagonist cannot be overcome.
Physiological, or functional, antagonism is opposing action through different
receptors or systems — adrenaline opposing the bronchospasm and vasodilatation of
anaphylaxis.
Chemical antagonism is direct combination of the two substances:
protamine neutralising heparin by ionic binding,
sugammadex encapsulating rocuronium, chelators binding metals.
Pharmacokinetic antagonism reduces the concentration of the active drug — enzyme
induction lowering effect. Recognising the type predicts whether the antagonism is
surmountable and how it can be used or overcome.
Which combinations prolong the QT interval and risk torsades de pointes?
Many drugs prolong the QT interval by blocking cardiac potassium channels,
and combining them, or giving them to a patient with other risk factors,
can precipitate the polymorphic ventricular tachycardia torsades de pointes.
The culprits include certain antiarrhythmics, some antipsychotics, methadone,
ondansetron and the other setrons we use,
certain antibiotics such as the macrolides and fluoroquinolones,
and some antifungals.
The risk is compounded by hypokalaemia, hypomagnesaemia,
bradycardia and pre-existing long-QT. The practical lesson is to be aware which of
our own drugs prolong the QT, to avoid stacking several, to correct electrolytes,
and to be cautious in the patient already at risk.
Describe the dangerous interactions of monoamine oxidase inhibitors relevant to
anaesthesia.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors prevent the breakdown of monoamines,
and two dangerous interactions follow.
With indirectly acting sympathomimetics — ephedrine, metaraminol,
and dietary tyramine in the classic cheese reaction — the accumulated noradrenaline
is released en masse, causing a hypertensive crisis;
so directly acting vasopressors such as phenylephrine, in reduced dose,
are preferred, and indirect agents avoided.
With pethidine and other serotonergic opioids,
a life-threatening excitatory reaction resembling the serotonin syndrome can occur,
with hyperthermia, agitation and cardiovascular instability;
pethidine is therefore contraindicated, and other opioids are used cautiously.
The management of a patient on these drugs requires knowing which agents are safe,
and ideally planning the anaesthetic with this in mind.
What is the serotonin syndrome, and how is it managed?
The serotonin syndrome is a potentially life-threatening reaction caused by excess
serotonergic activity, usually from a combination of serotonergic drugs — selective
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, pethidine, tramadol,
methylene blue and others.
It presents with a triad of neuromuscular excitation, including clonus,
hyperreflexia and rigidity; autonomic instability, with hyperthermia,
tachycardia and sweating; and altered mental state, with agitation.
It can progress to severe hyperthermia, rhabdomyolysis and multi-organ failure.
Management is to stop the serotonergic drugs, provide supportive care with cooling,
sedation with benzodiazepines and control of autonomic instability, and,
in severe cases, the serotonin antagonist cyproheptadine.
Recognising it, and avoiding the precipitating combinations perioperatively,
is the key.
Which drugs and conditions potentiate non-depolarising neuromuscular blockade?
Several. The volatile anaesthetic agents potentiate the block and reduce the
relaxant requirement. The aminoglycoside antibiotics,
and to a lesser extent others, impair neuromuscular transmission and prolong the
block. Magnesium, used in pre-eclampsia, markedly potentiates it.
Local anaesthetics and some antiarrhythmics contribute.
Physiological factors matter too: hypothermia, respiratory and metabolic acidosis,
hypokalaemia and hypocalcaemia all prolong the block and impair its reversal.
The clinical consequence is that in a patient on these drugs or in these states,
I would expect a longer duration of block,
titrate the relaxant carefully with neuromuscular monitoring,
and ensure full reversal before extubation.
It is a frequent and important pharmacodynamic interaction.
Comment on the differing interactions of acute and chronic alcohol.
Acute and chronic alcohol have opposite effects on drug handling and effect.
Acutely, alcohol is a central depressant, adding to the effect of anaesthetics,
sedatives and opioids, and it competes for and inhibits hepatic metabolism,
raising the concentration of co-administered drugs.
Chronically, in the tolerant drinker,
enzyme induction accelerates the metabolism of many drugs,
and there is cross-tolerance, so that higher doses of anaesthetic agents may be
needed; but induction also increases the production of toxic metabolites,
notably raising the risk of paracetamol hepatotoxicity.
The chronic drinker may also have hepatic impairment that reduces metabolism.
So the same substance, acutely and chronically, produces contrasting interactions,
which the history must establish.
Briefly, how do food and grapefruit juice interact with drugs?
Food can alter absorption — delaying or enhancing it, or binding drugs as described.
The most cited specific example is grapefruit juice,
which inhibits intestinal CYP3A4 and the transporter P-glycoprotein,
increasing the absorption and concentration of drugs metabolised by that pathway,
such as certain calcium-channel blockers, statins and immunosuppressants,
sometimes to toxic levels.
Tyramine-containing foods interact dangerously with monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
Vitamin K in the diet affects warfarin.
These food-drug interactions are a reminder that interactions are not confined to
co-prescribed drugs, and that a relevant dietary and supplement history is part of
safe prescribing.
Beyond the Type A and B scheme, what is the DoTS classification of adverse
reactions?
The DoTS classification is a more modern framework that classifies adverse
reactions along three axes: the relationship to Dose, the Time course,
and patient Susceptibility.
The dose axis distinguishes reactions occurring at sub-therapeutic doses in
susceptible people, those at therapeutic doses, and those only at high doses.
The time axis distinguishes rapid, first-dose, early, intermediate,
late and delayed reactions — important because some reactions appear only after
prolonged use or after withdrawal.
The susceptibility axis recognises the genetic, age, sex,
physiological and disease factors that make particular patients vulnerable.
DoTS is more informative than the simple Type A and B division because it directs
attention to who is at risk, when, and at what dose,
which guides both prevention and recognition.
Outline the extended adverse-reaction categories — the types beyond A and B.
The classification was extended beyond augmented Type A and bizarre Type B to
capture other patterns. Type C, continuing or chronic reactions,
relate to cumulative dose or prolonged use — osteoporosis with long-term
corticosteroids.
Type D, delayed reactions, appear long after exposure — carcinogenesis or
teratogenesis. Type E, end-of-use reactions,
are withdrawal phenomena on stopping a drug — the rebound on stopping a
beta-blocker or the withdrawal from opioids or benzodiazepines.
Type F, failure of therapy, is an unexpected lack of efficacy,
often from an interaction or resistance. These categories remind me that adverse
effects are not only the immediate, and that chronic,
delayed and withdrawal effects must be anticipated.
What factors increase a patient's risk of adverse drug reactions?
Several recognised factors. Polypharmacy is foremost,
since the risk of interactions rises steeply with the number of drugs.
Extremes of age — the neonate with immature handling,
the elderly with reduced organ function,
altered body composition and frequent polypharmacy — increase risk.
Renal and hepatic impairment reduce elimination and raise concentrations.
Genetic factors underlie the idiosyncratic reactions.
Female sex, certain comorbidities, and a previous history of drug reactions also
raise risk.
Recognising the high-risk patient prompts more careful prescribing — fewer drugs,
lower doses, closer monitoring and a thorough drug and allergy history — which is
the practical application of knowing the risk factors.
How does an understanding of interactions inform the management of a patient's
regular medication around surgery?
It guides which drugs to continue and which to stop.
Most cardiovascular drugs, including beta-blockers, are continued to avoid rebound,
though the renin-angiotensin blockers are sometimes withheld on the day of surgery
because of hypotension under anaesthesia.
Anticoagulants and antiplatelet agents are managed by balancing bleeding against
thrombotic risk, with timed cessation and, where needed, bridging.
Among the antidiabetic drugs, metformin and the sodium-glucose cotransporter-two
inhibitors are managed with attention to the risk of lactic acidosis and of
euglycaemic ketoacidosis respectively,
the latter now prompting advice to stop these agents before surgery.
Anticonvulsants and steroids are continued,
with stress steroid cover where indicated. Each decision rests on understanding the
drug's interactions and withdrawal effects, applied to the individual.
A word on latex allergy in this context.
Latex is an important cause of perioperative allergic reaction,
including anaphylaxis, and it differs from drug allergy in that the exposure is
environmental — gloves, tourniquets, equipment — rather than an injected drug,
so it may be overlooked.
At-risk groups include those with frequent prior exposure,
such as patients with spina bifida or multiple operations,
certain healthcare workers, and those with allergy to particular fruits that
cross-react.
Management is avoidance: a latex-free environment and equipment for the sensitised
patient, ideally as the first case of the day,
and treatment of any reaction as for anaphylaxis.
It is a reminder that perioperative reactions are not only to the drugs we inject.
Give a worked example of a dangerous metabolic interaction with warfarin.
Warfarin is a low-extraction, capacity-limited drug of narrow therapeutic index,
given as a racemate whose more potent S-enantiomer is metabolised by the cytochrome
enzyme CYP2C9.
Adding a potent inhibitor of that enzyme — for example certain antifungals,
amiodarone, metronidazole or some antibiotics — reduces warfarin's metabolism,
raises its concentration and prolongs the international normalised ratio,
risking serious haemorrhage.
Conversely, adding an enzyme inducer such as rifampicin or carbamazepine
accelerates its metabolism, reducing anticoagulation and risking thrombosis,
with a dangerous rebound when the inducer is later stopped.
Because the consequences are bleeding or clotting,
any change to a warfarinised patient's drugs prompts closer monitoring of the
international normalised ratio. It is the archetypal clinically important metabolic
interaction.
Do herbal and over-the-counter preparations interact with anaesthetic drugs?
Yes, and they are easily overlooked because patients may not regard them as
medicines. Saint John's wort is a potent enzyme inducer that reduces the effect of
many drugs.
Ginkgo, garlic, ginger and fish oils can increase bleeding tendency,
relevant to neuraxial techniques and surgery.
Some herbal preparations have sedative effects additive with anaesthetics,
and others contain unrecognised active constituents.
Over-the-counter non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs interact with
antihypertensives, anticoagulants and renally cleared drugs.
The lesson is to ask specifically about herbal remedies,
supplements and over-the-counter medicines in the drug history,
since the patient may not volunteer them,
and to advise stopping those that increase bleeding risk before surgery.
Explain additive toxicity as a form of pharmacodynamic interaction.
Drugs that share a toxic effect can combine to produce harm even when each alone
would be tolerated.
Additive nephrotoxicity occurs when, for example, an aminoglycoside,
a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug and a contrast agent or a calcineurin
inhibitor are combined, each insulting the kidney.
Additive ototoxicity occurs with aminoglycosides and loop diuretics together.
Additive central depression — the combined respiratory and conscious-level
depression of opioids, benzodiazepines,
alcohol and anaesthetics — is the commonest and most dangerous example in our
practice.
Additive bleeding risk arises from combining anticoagulants and antiplatelet
agents. Recognising shared toxicities, rather than only shared therapeutic effects,
allows these dangerous accumulations of risk to be anticipated and avoided.
Detail the synergistic respiratory depression of opioids and sedatives.
Opioids depress respiration by reducing the brainstem's responsiveness to carbon
dioxide and by depressing the conscious drive to breathe,
while benzodiazepines and other sedatives depress consciousness and airway tone and
blunt the arousal response to hypoxia and hypercarbia.
Given together, they act synergistically,
so that the combined respiratory depression is greater than the sum of the two
given separately — a dose of each that would be safe alone can together cause
apnoea and airway obstruction.
This synergy is responsible for many serious events in sedation and on the ward,
particularly in the elderly and those with sleep-disordered breathing.
It is managed by reducing the dose of each, titrating carefully,
monitoring oxygenation and ventilation,
and having reversal agents and airway support available.
Summarise how you take and act on a drug and allergy history preoperatively.
I would systematically establish all the patient's medicines — prescribed,
over-the-counter, herbal and recreational — with doses and timing,
and decide for each whether to continue, withhold or adjust it around surgery,
anticipating interactions and withdrawal effects.
I would take a careful allergy history,
for every reported reaction establishing the agent,
the nature and severity of the reaction, and whether it represents true allergy,
intolerance or a predictable side-effect,
since a label of allergy that is really a known side-effect should not needlessly
deny a useful drug, while a true anaphylaxis must be rigorously avoided.
I would note any family history of reactions such as suxamethonium apnoea or
malignant hyperthermia, and any latex or antiseptic sensitivity.
This structured history is the foundation on which interactions and adverse
reactions are prevented.
How does polypharmacy in the elderly compound these risks,
and how do you mitigate it?
The elderly patient concentrates several risk factors at once:
reduced renal and hepatic function slowing elimination,
altered body composition changing distribution,
increased sensitivity of the central nervous system, and, above all, polypharmacy,
since the probability of an interaction rises steeply with the number of drugs,
and many older patients take a long list.
The consequences are more frequent and more serious interactions and adverse
reactions, including falls, confusion and bleeding.
Mitigation rests on rationalising the medication — reviewing whether each drug is
still needed, deprescribing where possible,
using the fewest drugs at the lowest effective doses,
avoiding agents on lists of those best avoided in the elderly,
and monitoring closely.
The principle is that in the older patient, less is often safer,
and a careful medication review is itself a therapeutic act.
Give an example where an interaction is deliberately exploited to manage toxicity
or overdose.
Interactions are turned to advantage in treating poisoning and reversing drug
effects.
Naloxone is given to antagonise opioid overdose at the receptor;
flumazenil reverses benzodiazepine effect;
specific antidotes such as protamine for heparin and idarucizumab for dabigatran
are chemical antagonists that bind and neutralise the drug.
Lipid emulsion is used in severe local-anaesthetic systemic toxicity,
acting as a sink that sequesters the lipophilic drug away from the heart and brain.
Acetylcysteine replenishes glutathione in paracetamol poisoning.
Even manipulation of urinary pH to enhance excretion of a weak acid is a deliberate
pharmacokinetic interaction.
In each, an understanding of how one agent modifies another is used purposely to
undo harm, which is the therapeutic face of the same principles that, unplanned,
cause dangerous interactions.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Interactions are pharmaceutical (incompatibility, e.g.
thiopental–suxamethonium precipitation), pharmacokinetic (absorption, distribution,
metabolism, excretion) or pharmacodynamic (additive, synergistic, antagonistic).
Second, Balanced anaesthesia and multimodal analgesia deliberately exploit synergy;
antagonism is exploited in reversal (naloxone, flumazenil, neostigmine,
sugammadex) — but combined central depressants are a major danger.
Third, Adverse reactions split into Type A (augmented, dose-related, predictable,
common) and Type B (bizarre, idiosyncratic or immune, uncommon, often serious);
allergy, idiosyncrasy and intolerance are distinct. 4.
Perioperative anaphylaxis is led by neuromuscular blockers,
antibiotics and chlorhexidine (NAP6); treat with adrenaline, oxygen and fluids,
then timed tryptase samples and allergy-clinic referral.
Fourth, Specific anaesthetic reactions — malignant hyperthermia,
suxamethonium apnoea and hyperkalaemia, serotonin syndrome,
local-anaesthetic toxicity — must be recognised early;
report suspected reactions via pharmacovigilance schemes.
Thank you. That concludes the station.